Lynn, look, thank you very
much. Uh, nice to see you. Sorry,
I'm not hearing you, Andy. Oh,
Hang on. Well,
I am, no,
my, my device is working.
Can we can hear you? Can anyone else hear me? Yep.
Yeah, Carlos can hear me? Yep. Good.
Can you hear now, Lynn,
You rejoin and come back?
We can, we can hear you though, Lynn.
Oh, well, I'm back. Can you hear me now?
Sorry, I'm not hearing you. Um, can someone else, uh,
someone else contribute?
Oh, can you hear me? Lynn?
Can you hear me? Or, or she's offline now, I think.
Okay. I think she might be trying again. So
Just bringing one back through now.
Okay.
Oh, sorry about that. Can you hear me?
Yes. Yep. Loud and clear. Can you hear me?
I can't hear you. Oh,
Can you hear me?
Or you can't hear me as well,
Right? If you, have
You turned on the volume?
Anything? Lynn, can you hear us,
Jonathan?
Good. I can hear you now. You can.
Oh, great. What have you, what did you do?
I, I had a young person help me. That's what
I did. Oh, well,
that, that always does the job. Yeah,
Exactly. That's what they're
here for, isn't it? Oh, we can all
Thanks. We can all
resemble, we can all resemble that. Okay.
We've got you down for 10 minutes.
Um, yeah, you can take your submission as read.
Uh, thank you. Please do highlight anything, um, key things
that you want to highlight will do.
Um, and I will give you a call with four minutes to go,
just, um, because we do like to, um,
we do like to ask questions.
Uh, so, um, your time starts now.
Thanks very much for the opportunity.
Uh, the bill's objective
to transition all vehicles on New Zealand roads from the
payment of fuel exercise duty to, uh,
road user charges is supported by the FSF
because it will ensure that all vehicles are contributing
to the maintenance and upgrade of these roads, regardless
of the means by which they're pard.
However, we believe there are a number of issues
that must be worked through before
this can become a reality.
The infrastructure to enable these to be easily purchased
and to enable digital service alternatives
to physical labels must be in place first
before all vehicles transition to road user charges.
We note that the regulatory systems transport amendment
bill, that was introduced to the house in August last year
will allow for the di digitization of vehicle labels.
However, the technology that would enable digital labels
for road user charges, warrants a fitness registration,
et cetera in all vehicles in the New Zealand fleet,
will be expensive to roll out in a realistic timeframe.
To do so, needs to be in place
before the move away from fuel exercise duty
to road user charges to ensure that all revenue owed
by road users is being efficiently collected.
As an example for f SFS fleet leasing members,
the current outdated paper-based system requires
that road user charges, labels are physically printed
as required by their customers, and then couriered to them.
This equates to hundreds
and thousands of hundreds of thousands of labels each year.
This would increase exponentially if all light vehicles
and move to the payment arose users charges
and will be extremely costly to administer
the move from fuel excise paid at the
pump to Universal road.
User charges should not go ahead
until paper labels can be phased out completely,
and the system move to one that's digital.
The FSF also submits that the process for purchasing
of road user charges needs to be as simple as possible
for consumers and other vehicle owners.
Having the only means to purchase them being either online
through NZTA or physically through New Zealand post outlets
or AA centers, is just not practical,
particularly given the recent announcement by NZ post
that over 140 of their current outlets are to be closed.
The bills amendment to the LTMA to provide
that the registered person is liable
for the toll if the driver fails to pay.
It is a sensible one,
and the FSF strongly recommends that this should be extended
to the liability for the payment of road user charges.
Unpaid rux should not be a liability
on the finance provider.
In the event that a vehicle is repossessed, it is unpaid tax
and therefore should be a liability on the registered owner
of the vehicle that is owed directly
to the in inland revenue.
If this recommendation is not taken up,
vehicle finance providers repossessing a vehicle will incur
significant extra cost
to clear outstanding road user charges
before they can onsell a vehicle
to recover what they're owed.
Given that repossession,
repossession only takes place when the loan is in a serious
default position, it's also likely
that there will be other outstandings against the vehicle,
such as it not being registered
or warranted, which the lender has
to remedy before it can be sold.
And it's very often the case that lenders are unable
to recoup all that they're owed on a repossessed vehicle
when they on sell it,
including unpaid road user charges is something the lender
must pay before the vehicle can be sold.
Add to that shortfall whilst the average amount owing at the
time of repossession is
around a thousand dollars at the moment, this can be up
to 15,000 depending on the type of vehicle involved.
The cost to lenders is already significant
with the average amount of unpaid road user charges.
They're paying each year following repossessions being
around 85,000.
If all vehicles in the light vehicle fleeted
to become subject to road user charges, this cost
to the lenders businesses will increase exponentially.
Those are really the main points of our submission,
so I'm happy to take questions now.
Really appreciate that. Thank you, Lynn.
Um, questions, colleagues.
Lynn, uh, I wanted to ask you a couple, you,
you do talked about the cost of rolling out the, um,
the digital process, but, um,
it's already a very expensive process
now. The, the, the the
Paper-based system is Yeah, and,
and I think the technology, certainly as I understand it,
to um, digitize has, um, is, is now available.
Um, would it be reasonable for us to actually say, look, we,
we think, um, that we should at least understand, um,
as a nation, as decision makers, what the relative costs are
of running the paper base versus the, that's
Entirely If everybody, if everybody was moving to ruck,
to digital ruck, should I say Yeah, to R and digital R
Yes. Yeah,
that sounds entirely sensible to me.
Okay. No, that, that makes sense.
Um, you also made a comment in your submission that, um,
there's this very small proportion
of vehicles which are not subject to either fed or ruck.
At least that's the way I understood you just say
with EVs and pvs.
Is that what you understanding? Yeah.
Yes. That is my understanding
That that as of two years,
almost two years ago now, is no longer true.
I'm sorry. Oh, I'm sorry.
The EVs and PhDs are now subject to, um, uh, to,
um, to Iraq,
Right? I,
I beg your pardon? Yep.
Okay. And finally, um,
I don't see anybody else asking a question at this stage.
You've also made the observation about a lot
of vehicles not being paid up in terms of WAFs and,
and um, uh, and registration and so on.
And obviously we can look at that.
'cause that number was a very large number.
Um, you, do you have any observations about how we might,
um, improve that?
You know, I mean, you, you are, the, the industry
that you are involved in might have, uh, observations for
how you work with people who are reluctant to get involved
and do what they're supposed to do.
Yeah, I, I guess that's true.
I, I, I guess, you know, it is a fact that, um, if a loan,
um, on a vehicle falls into, into default that it's,
it's not unusual for the loan, for the, um, vehicle also
to be unwarranted or unregistered.
Um, yeah, that, that's not unusual.
I guess, you know, there are people who just take the,
take the risk of driving unwarranted
and unregistered vehicles and, and,
and I guess, you know, it's a hardship
situation in some situations.
Uh, people just can't afford the, the extra money.
And I mean, that's why there are vehicles on the road
that are also uninsured.
Um, and that's another conversation around whether
or not we should have compulsory third party
insurance on motor vehicles.
Mm. Yeah. Okay.
Definitely something we need to ask the, um, officials about
how we make sure that we have a robust system.
Lynn, I don't see any other questions from any
of my other colleagues, so, um,
we will leave it there and thank you very much.
Thank you. Right. That takes us to the taxpayers union.
Are they on, on, uh, the call there?
Uh, yep. They are just waiting
for 'em to turn their camera on.
Good,
Good hear. Thank you. Alright,
Brilliant. Good to see
you. Um, thank you very much for the submission.
We've got you down for, um, for 10 minutes.
Um, and, uh, you can take your submission as read, so,
but if you do want to highlight any particular elements,
that's always appreciated, I'll give you a call
with four minutes to go if you are still presenting, uh,
because we do like to ask questions.
So, um, yeah, in your time. Alright,
Well thank you. Thank you.
Uh, good afternoon
to you chair and members of the committee.
Uh, my name is Austin Nel and Banks.
I'm a researcher here at the Taxpayers Union.
I'm joined by James Ross, our head of policy
and legislative affairs, and Ray Deacon, our economists.
Um, thank you for giving us the opportunity today
to present on this bill while we're gonna focus
mainly on tolling.
Um, now while tolling has always been used, uh,
it hasn't been used extensively in New Zealand.
It's always followed, uh, core principles.
Firstly, tolling has been targeted to motorists
who benefit from the toll road so
that they're only charged from when they actually
use the new road.
Second tolling revenue has been ring fenced
for that specific road.
So revenue can only go towards the planning, construction,
et cetera of that road itself.
Uh, and third, toll free
alternatives have always been available.
Now, these principles matter, uh,
because they embody genuine user pays, uh,
that is people pay for the service they benefit from.
So if you drive along the Northern gateway, you pay
for the Northern gateway, uh,
and that money is ring-fenced towards the maintenance,
et cetera of that specific road.
Uh, now this status quo
to tolling is one we wholeheartedly support,
but this bill seems
to take a different path deviating from those core
principles, uh, in three ways.
The first of which is corridor tolling.
Uh, now section 48, 2 B
of the bill would allow existing roads
to be told if they're within the same transport
corridor as a new road.
Uh, while this clearly expands the circumstances under, uh,
which existing roads can be told, the problem is
that it's not entirely clear to us to
what extent that can happen.
Uh, and that's because the bill doesn't define
what a corridor is,
despite there being many different meanings and types.
Uh, so let me give you an example of why that troubles us.
Say a bypass is built somewhere along the Wellington
Northern Corridor, the stretch between live in
and Wellington, uh, under this provision.
Existing roads within that corridor could be told
that the user accrues benefits from it.
Uh, but what that means in practice isn't entirely
clear at the bypass.
At the bypass, for example,
serves one area along the corridor.
The drivers who never use it, uh, still pay a toll just
because they're traveling through the same corridor.
I'm not entirely sure, but if the answer is yes, that would
of course strain the principle of user pays.
The second issue is the use of tolling revenue.
Uh, so the bill allows toll revenue to be used
for maintenance of existing roads as well
as the alternative roads, uh, if it enhances efficiency
or uses accrue benefits.
Now the user's accrue benefits test is remarkably broad.
Of course, users benefit from
maintained roads, that's a given.
The issue here is that we already charge motorists through,
through road user charges and the fuel exide duty.
Um, so we're gonna be double charging if we charge people,
uh, to, to on a toll and then as well as those charges.
Uh, and that's despite well soon to be shifting to rock.
Um, the change we incidentally support.
Uh, but what's worse for us is the toll revenue going
towards maintaining alternative routes.
This would see people using the toll revenue, uh,
to effectively subsidize the infrastructure
as the alternative road they've specifically chosen not
to use, which is the complete opposite of user pays.
Now, the third and final point is forced
tolls for heavy vehicles.
The currently, before you establish a toll, there has
to be a feasible, untold alternative route that applies
to everyone at the moment, including trucks.
Section 46 D would change this, it would allow the minister
to bang heavy vehicles from using the alternative route.
Uh, if they use it anyway, they'll get fined.
So what that does is it shifts the toll from being a
voluntary payment to a compulsory levy, essentially, uh,
and to add insult injury.
Those heavy vehicles now compelled to use the toll road,
but see their toll payments used
to maintain the alternative route
for which they can't use, uh, these costs.
These added costs will ultimately throw a flow through
to households as high prices, uh,
which would directly contradict the government's efforts on
cost of living and the go for growth agenda.
So members, I'll quickly wrap up.
Um, this isn't an argument against tolling.
It's an argument for making sure tolling works properly.
This includes clarity concerning corridor tolling,
ring ring fencing, tolling revenue
to prevent double charging and cross subsidization.
And lastly, keeping alternative routes open to all vehicles,
including heavy vehicles.
And yes, this might mean a bit more maintenance costs on
some local roads, but those costs are shared as is.
And they also present an opportunity for value capture.
Uh, and I, we think that's a much more reasonable outcome
than abolishing user pays
for an entire category of vehicles.
So the bill says it's objective is user pays funding these
three changes, make sure it actually delivers on that.
Thank you. We're happy to take any questions.
Thank you. That's, uh, very clear.
Simon, you've ques got a question.
Um, thank you Mr. Chair.
Thank you to Taxpayer Union for, um,
providing the submission.
Just wanna come down to your paragraph 60
C Taxpayer Union urges the government
to address the issues you've raised
and see to reconsider the use of toll revenue
for maintenance on existing alternative routes.
Look, I I think it's clear the problem we're trying
to solve in New Zealand, we have a,
a current three year budget for our roading network
of about 32 billion.
Uh, we're collecting over that period about 14 billion.
The rest of it's being topped up by taxpayers.
So I understand the government is seeking to close that gap
to more closely, uh, connect the road user
and the people who pay to the benefits they get.
Just thinking about the maintenance aspect, though,
every 25 years, a road built in New Zealand out of asphalt
and, uh, aggregate needs
to be completely reconstructed right down
to the clay subgrade that every eight
to 12 years chip seal needs to be redone every 12
to 15, the asphalt.
So isn't it correct that essentially
you're constructing a new asset at a, at,
at a minimum every eight to 12 years out to 25 years?
And isn't it therefore fair to apply tolls
for asset renewal, which is a CapEx uh, expenditure, uh,
on existing routes?
Well, I think there's, I think
there's two aspects to that.
You know, one, firstly, clearly, you know, in,
in some instances there is a need for, uh, certain roads
to receive more transport funding, uh,
or rather to receive more sort of infrastructure funding.
But if, I mean, if what we're talking about is using tolls
as a new road tax, I think that's, we, you know, we need
to be upfront, we need to talk about it in those terms
because that's, that's a very different proposition
to using tolls, take a new infrastructure.
Um, I suppose to an extent, you know, using,
using tolls on existing roads is more user pace than just
using something from the consolidated fund.
But again, I think that's, um,
that differs slightly from the proposition we have in the
bill, which is, um, sort of,
uh, using it on, on alternative routes to tolls
where people are being sort of, uh,
driven away from those toll roads
towards alternative routes.
I mean, what you're doing there is sort of increasing the
cost to use that new toll route,
and you're sort of detaching those costs
from those benefits.
And that's when it starts to get sort of murky economically.
It's, um, and what we're trying to do is make sure
that roads are sort of kind up an economic
road to justify the toll.
Then if you're, if, if that toll isn't tied to the benefits
that that road road is actually creating,
then I think it starts getting a bit murky.
You know, I understood the policy, um,
to be reasonably clear that it was about tolling
for new roads, um,
and the bill as drafted, um, has shifted, um,
the position and your argument is in line with that,
with that shift of position.
I think that needed to be made a lot, a lot clearer, um, uh,
by the drafters and the policy makers.
Uh, I just add, I think we should look at the context
of this as well, the wider context.
I mean, New Zealand ranks among the top 10%
of OACD countries for spending on, on infrastructure.
It's $4,500 per per person.
We are in the bottom 10% for value for money,
and we ranked forth for, for asset management.
So I mean that's, you know, you,
you can raise a question about revenue,
but we don't wanna be throwing good money after bad
and there was acknowledged in cabinet paper
and the, the IRS, you know, we need to get on top of
how we manage our existing assets, which is
what you're talking about with renewing the roads
before we start tolling up
motorists standing on another charge.
Thanks. Very helpful. Yeah, thank you.
Uh, look, a couple of questions from me.
The first one of 'em is the, the issue of, um, forcing, um,
truck drivers, uh, or,
or freight, uh, to use, um,
toll routes as opposed to others.
Uh, and we've had quite a number of submissions
and discussion about that during the day.
It would be reasonable to say, look, if there is,
if there you've got a new road, a toll road,
and then you've got an old road.
If the old road is okay, you can use it.
You, you make, you make your choice, you know,
free market doing what it's, it's, uh, it wants to do.
If it's not okay, there is a process to be able to say,
look, the bridges aren't up to scratch,
or the road's not up to scratch.
Uh, we put a weight limit
or whatever else, whatever it might be to say, well,
no, you can't use that road.
But is that specific road not a general principle of,
you know, whether there's a toll road,
you must use the toll road, you can't use any of the others.
Is that a reasonable approach to take?
Well that's, that's the approach it's taken now.
Um, exactly. Uh, we're all, we're all familiar with, um, uh,
weight restricted bridges
and roads that are not suitable, um, for, uh, for heavy, um,
uh, trade vehicles.
Um, the issue for us is that
if a freight company, for example,
would not choose to use the toll, the toll road
and would swat to stick to the alternative,
it should still have that.
If there was no other safety, safety
or wear issues associated with its use, it should be able
to, uh, to do that.
But the toll,
but the, the major roading infrastructure that's gone in,
uh, that that's been produced in the last 10 years
and is, uh, is carrying forward, creates so many savings,
um, and fuel time and wear
and tear on vehicles that you have to ask the question
if a freight company's not prepared to use the,
the new toll road then is the,
was the toll road ever economic, uh, um, uh,
in the first place wasn't a good use, um, of public money.
Um, and uh, uh, the sort of the, the,
the savings that underpin the, these sorts of constructions,
are they in fact, uh, not really there
Now? Look, I think those
are all fair questions
to ask and look really appreciate.
As always the, the submission, our time has come
to an end, so thank you very much.
No worries. Thank you. Thank Okay, colleagues,
now we need to switch to the private zoom, um, to meet with,
uh, departmental advisor.
So we'll uh, log out of this one
and um, head into the, uh, private Zoom.
I.